[Music]
welcome to the archives of radio curious
i'm barry vogel agents of the fbi
have a history of illegal break-ins to
homes and offices
and a history of conducting wiretaps
without a search warrant
in the years when j edgar hoover was the
director of the fbi
these warrantless break-ins came to be
known as
black bag jobs this archive edition of
radio curious
was recorded in 1995 with wesley
swearingen
a former fbi agent and author of
fbi secrets an agent's expose
his book describes some of the black bag
warrantless searches
in which he was involved and his opinion
of
these activities
concludes his book by saying that the
hoover
era will continue to haunt the fbi
because hoover knowingly undermined the
united states constitution
when i spoke with wesley swearingen from
his home near tucson arizona
in december of 1995 i asked him what he
meant by that
[Music]
well the fbi flaunted the constitution
by
doing what we call black bag jobs or
illegal entries into the homes and
offices
of individuals that
hoover and his associates felt
were enemies of this country starting
off with the communist party and then
later on it became
religious groups such as the
nation of islam in chicago and in
other groups that opposed the vietnam
war
and in groups like the
black panther party and the weatherman
underground organization
a radical offshoot of the students for a
democratic society
and uh in the security division we just
flaunted
the constitution i mean it didn't mean
anything to us
well how were the targets of the black
bag jobs
identified
well first of all i guess i can
better describe it if i talk about the
communist party in chicago
because i'm more familiar with that we
would
identify the top leaders
and then target them for bag jobs and if
we
found information that was
worth going after later on they
in another month or two then we would
repeat that
if there was nothing in a person's home
or office then we would
go after other individuals and if we
suspected someone has a courier later on
when there were
people who became fugitives because they
had been indicted
for a violation of the smith act and
then disappeared
we would try to
get information through black bag jobs
of
uh the location
of these futures through the couriers
and
you know maybe they would have letters
that they were taking to
other people who might know something
about the location of a particular
fugitive
well in your book you indicate that
you were an fbi agent who did these
black bag jobs so that means that you
actually went into people's homes and
businesses
yes i did and when you did that
um did you leave it in such a way that
people had known that you were there
no uh all the ones that i did
we measured first and
just about that time polaroid
developed the instant camera
which was a great assistance because if
we wanted to look at someone's
papers on a desk for instance we could
take a photograph
and then in about 60 seconds we'd have a
photograph of exactly
how things were placed on the desk
and before that the development of the
polaroid
we would have to take notes copious
notes
and we would use a ruler to to measure
maybe an envelope so far from the
front of the desk and so far from the
side of the desk and
try to remember exactly how to place it
and after we made those notes we would
open up the letter if there's something
in there with the
photographing we would photograph it put
it back exactly
the way we found it so how how did you
open the letter so that it could be
sealed without it being
revealed that it had been opened well uh
if they were actually sealed then
we would try to steam it open
and it's not too difficult if you have
the time
if say we went in at the nine o'clock in
the morning after someone had gone to
work
uh got an eight-hour job and he he was
there at eight o'clock in the morning
and then
if everything else was all right
that meant that we could stay there
probably till four o'clock in the
afternoon before you get home
but we always had those other other
agents
following them to work to make sure that
that's where they were
so if we had the time then we'd start a
little
teapot on the stove you know use
the person's stove to generate a little
steam
and open it up and read it
photograph it if it was important and
then reseal it how pervasive was this
you're talking about it now in the early
50s during the height of the communist
mccarthy scare well i consider it
very pervasive in chicago at the time we
had about 275
agents there were about 25 of us
close to 10 of the office
doing nothing but bag jobs on the
commerce party
and we did this this this was our only
job
for several years going into people's
homes and
and looking at their personal papers and
yes and going into their offices
you know when they'd go home at night
then we'd we'd go into their offices
how would you get in to either the home
or the office
well the safest way was to
try to get a key and
if if we were going into someone's home
normally all these people lived in
apartment buildings
in chicago so it wasn't too difficult to
make arrangements with the janitor
or the superintendent of the building
just to give us a key of course
we would always have to check his
background first and make sure that
he was on our side so in other words the
janitor or the superintendent knew
that this bag job was going on or about
to go on at some point
well they they had a pretty good idea
that
this was what we're going to do and in
some instances
we did let them know that we were
actually on the premises
just so that and in one particular case
it
proved to be uh very worthwhile because
a neighbor accidentally saw me
and another agent go into a person's
apartment
and she called the police yeah
after she called the police then she
called
manager of the building and the manager
of the building immediately
called the fbi office and told
whoever answered the phone in the office
that you know fbi since we're in an
apartment
and one of the neighbors just called the
police so they
passed it on to the radio room and then
the gallon radio room
said you know repeat it said a neighbor
called the police
so we packed up our belongings and got
out and
just as we hopped into the car the
police were rounding the corner
we were almost caught that was about the
closest
situation that i had ever been involved
with and
it was close to you know 500 bag jobs in
chicago
i understand that after you wrote your
book
your boat was raided by the fbi was that
a bag job or was it a raid
that was a raid that was after i had
written my
first manuscript which uh by titled
fbi chicanery the reason
i think the reason that the fbi created
that i had already
talked to an attorney who
had gone to the department of justice
and was
giving them some of this corruption that
i wanted to report to the
attorney general but the fbi claims
that they found some of my material down
in jonestown
this was back in 1978
when tim jones gave this kool-aid or
whatever it was
right the cyanide kool-aid to 900 people
yeah and they
either committed suicide or were
murdered i don't know but everybody ever
figured that one out but some of my
papers were down there
and of course i was completely surprised
i had never heard of
jonestown before or people's temple
but i discovered that my attorney was
also
their attorney in san francisco and
when they were in the office one time
they
found out that a former fbi was
giving information to the attorney to
give to the attorney general
and they were so paranoid that they had
looked at my files when they were in the
office unbeknownst to
my attorney these are the jonestown and
people's temple people
yeah the people people did a backdrop on
my attorneys
was in san francisco and they they took
some of the information i
i had nothing in there about jonestown i
didn't even
know that they existed i mean i i might
have read about them in the newspaper
but
uh it was just something in passing i
had no idea
that they were plants well wes
you've mentioned the bag jobs that
hoover knowingly did and instructed his
people to do
and there's a whole list a whole
shopping list in your book
in fbi secrets an agent's expose which
is published by south end press what are
some of the
other violations of the constitution
that you can tell us about
well just in general the
kinds of dirty tricks uh
i don't know that they're necessarily
violations
of the constitution but certainly
violations of a person's civil rights
to police authorities to abusing
someone's civil rights
like making them targets of co-intel pro
that's code word for
counterintelligence program and certain
individuals were chosen to
either be fired from their jobs or
harass to break up their divorce
just make life miserable in general some
instances
they were framed and put in jail other
times
the fbi arranged assassinations
tell us about those you mentioned in
your book that the supervisor of the
chicago office was
an accessory before the fact of some
murders in chicago
yes the agent who told me about this
uh years after it happened had been
one of the agents i worked with in
chicago for many years
on these black bag jobs and
we trusted each other you know with our
lives
he felt that i was sympathetic because i
had done all these things
in the past and he we were having a
discussion we were at
quantico for a training session and
we happened to be sitting there in a
little
restaurant drinking 3-2 beer which was
the strongest thing that they could have
there quantico but we were
discussing old times and we hadn't seen
each other for
i guess was maybe 15 years
and we were talking about the bag jobs
back in chicago and
i said you know what what we were doing
we thought that was bad i said what
their
agents are doing out in los angeles or
worse they're putting
uh innocent people in jail uh just
because they're
the leader of the black panther party he
said well i got a better one than that
and then he told me about the raid that
the chicago police did on the
panther headquarters in 1969 where
fred hampton and mark park were
shot to death and he said the fbi
had set up the chicago police to do this
raid
hopefully killing maybe a couple of
dozen black panthers but uh
that particular night there were only
two of them there and uh
you know i just i couldn't believe it
when he said this
when you uh talk about this in your book
you make reference to greg york
as being the supervisor in the chicago
office is that his real name
no that's a fictitious name i used just
to
protect his privacy and the privacy of
his
family and children there would be no
point in using his real name
the case was in court no one was tried
or
convicted the only thing that came out
of it was a
civil suit where the judge says yes
there was a violation of a civil
their civil rights and the the survivors
were
awarded 1.8 million dollars so you know
my mentioning his name was really not
important i'd just be harassing him
and opening myself and probably the
publisher
up to a lawsuit but you know his real
name means
nothing you're listening to a 1995
archive edition of radio curious
with former fbi agent wesley swearingen
author of fbi secrets
and agents expose i'm barry vogel
wes i want to ask you about where you
draw the line and
your expose and
in why you have chosen
to uh write this book
about the agency that you say in the
preface that you loved so much
well i i draw the line at
what i consider wrongdoing
now i'm not exposing other secrets i'm
not
exposing other investigations
i am trying to expose
just what i personally know of
where the fbi abused the power
of their office where they violated the
constitution
and just plain outright used
unethical tactics against
people who have a legal right to express
their political beliefs in this country
what i'm
leading to is the history
of how the aura or fact
of untouchability of the fbi developed
in that they can get away with the bad
jobs that they can get away with being
an accessory
before the fact to murder and at the
same time
are involved in catching bank robbers
well it all started when diego hoover
took over as director of the fbi
back in 1924 and the attorney general
gave him complete authority to
do whatever he wanted to straighten out
the organization because it was so
corrupt
when he took over but it was a different
kind of corruption
the agents then were taking kickbacks
and
just covering over certain
investigations
so hoover took over and he had this
blanket authority and he started out to
do well
and he got so much authority that
i guess he figured hey you know this
this is pretty neat
i've got more power than the president
united states
and as he got more power and more power
members of congress were afraid of him
and
uh whenever anyone tried to criticize
him it didn't make him it's whether it
was a member of congress or
someone in the media hoover would have
an investigation conducted on this
person's background and if there was
anything
at all in a person's background hoover
would
bring it to this person's attention and
say hey
you stop talking about me or we're going
to expose
all the things that you don't want
anyone to know about
and so he was using extortion
tactics on members of the media members
of congress
uh even presidents of the united states
and so everyone just bowed to him and
when someone has that much authority
there's nothing you can do i mean some
people
tried to expose him and
they were just neutralized as who would
call
when you say he was using this power of
extortion on
precedence can you give us some
specifics
well probably the closest thing was
john kennedy and his brother bobby who
were attorney general
who was attorney general and when
kennedy started doing certain things and
bobby was telling hoover this and that
the fbi conducted an investigation on
john kennedy
and found that he was having some extra
marital affairs uh prior to becoming
president
and uh he was confronted with this
and so he backed off on
some of the things that he was planning
to do
were there any um pre-inauguration
pre-kennedy inauguration issues that
resulted in kennedy reappointing hoover
as the director of the fbi
i don't know of any personally
but the thing is
there wasn't any president who really
had
nerve enough to ask
uber to retire even when he was eligible
when he was old enough
to retire you say nerve enough what do
you mean
uh they were just afraid of their jobs
they were afraid
that if if they asked
her to step down that he was going to
expose something in their background
that they didn't want exposed
and this flows from what you were saying
where the attorney general
gave hoover the unprecedented authority
to do pretty much
what he wanted and it mushroomed and
developed so that he had such an arsenal
of knowledge that he could use it
against even the presidents well
the attorney general did and congress
did and
the president himself did because every
everybody
was afraid of him and now does that
authority extend to the director of the
fbi
in the present day well
probably not as much
because we supposedly have
congressional guidelines that the fbi
has to operate
within and
there is supposed to be an oversight
by the attorney general the department
of justice
but the thing is you know even though
these guidelines exist i don't know
how effective it's going to be
when all the fbi has to do is lie
to the department of justice and
certainly there's a perfect case
right now under investigation and that's
the ruby ridge
fiasco where vicki weaver shot and
killed
i mean the senate had hearings
and i think it was five agents who
refused to testify
take they were taking the fifth
amendment
i mean you've got the agents who have
sworn to uphold the constitution
and they're called before a tribunal
such as the senate
and they say oh i can't tell you
anything about that
i'm going to claim the first amendment
because i might have done something
wrong
where does all this lead it seems like
that we have an agency which is
part of the executive department of our
uh three parts of government
that's just gone radically out of
control that it can do what it wants
well uh it has been doing it did what it
wanted to do
for uh all the years that
i worked for hoover uh within
limitations
uh you know there's certain things that
you just can't
blatantly do it it was
slightly different than
hitler's gestapo i mean they just didn't
care if they wouldn't do something
they'd flat-out do it
they'd walk down the street and shoot
someone whereas here the fbi would
destroy them emotionally so that they
would kill themselves right
or they would have them set up by
someone else
you know the the fbi would condone the
killing like
the panthers in chicago and two of the
panthers in los angeles
you know there were there were
limitations that
the fbi could go to just because if
if the people knew about it they just
wouldn't have tolerated i mean hoover
would have been out on his ear
before the end of the day had congress
and the attorney general and the
president
known what was going on well when you
talk about
ruby ridge and compare it to hoover
being out on his ear
have there been changes in the time
since hoover
died and terminated his position as
director of fbi
or maybe his ghost still lingers i think
his ghost still lingers
the fbi claims there have been changes i
didn't see any changes
during the five years after he died
and i was still in in fact
he was already dead when geronimo pratt
was framed
hoover died in april and geronimo pratt
was framed for a murder he didn't commit
a month later
you really reveal that story in depth in
your book so i guess the listeners
who are interested will just have to get
the book we're coming to the close of of
our time and
and i want to ask you one more question
is what does a person do
to change this level of corruption
that this uh incorrect way for our
government to operate
well it's really difficult to say when
there's so much secrecy but
one of the ways is to you know pay
attention to what's going on and if you
see something report it to your
congressman
if you're suspicious that you know the
fbi is doing this or that
if if the department of justice won't do
anything and congress won't do anything
you know maybe go to the american civil
liberties
union and talk to them and there are
times that
you know they will stand a person
being victimized we have a very real
aspect of that story in here in
mendocino county with judy berry but
that is another program for another time
wesley swearingen i want to thank you
very much for joining us here on radio
curious and before we close
i'd like to ask you the question i ask
all of my guests
at the end of an interview and that is
could you tell us about an
interesting book that you've read lately
yeah
in fact i have it right here official
and confidential the secret life of
jagger hoover
by uh anthony summers that's
s-u-m-m-e-r-s very explosive
book it doesn't hold any punches
and it goes much further into
hoover's individual personality and his
sexual preferences than i do in my book
well wesley swearingen thank you very
much for joining us here on radio
curious
thank you barry for having me
[Music]
you've been listening to a 1995
interview with
wesley swearingen a former fbi agent
and author of fbi secrets and
agents expose the book that wesley
swearingen recommends
is official and confidential
the secret life of j edgar hoover by
anthony
summers this interview was recorded in
december
1995.
[Music]
over 400 radio curious programs may be
found on our website
radiocurious.org
they're free as my gift to you i hope
you enjoy them our address is
280 north oak street ukya
uk iah california 95482
the phone is 707 462-6
[Music]
and email is curious at radiocurious.org
christina honisted is our assistant
producer i'm host and producer barry
vogel
thank you for listening
[Music]
do
you